Tableau part one (#42)
LaunchCodeEducation/data-analysis-curriculum: content/tableau-part-one/reading/data-source/_index.md

+++
title = "Connecting Data"
date = 2024-03-12T15:04:03-05:00
draft = false
weight = 4
+++

> Before we connect to a data source to our Tableau workspace we will first look at what types of data there are, and how those data types are interpreted. You can find official documentation on [Tableau Data Types here](https://help.tableau.com/current/pro/desktop/en-us/datafields_typesandroles_datatypes.htm). Below we will relate the types of data in Tableau to previously known data types using `python` or `SQL`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before we connect to a data source to our Tableau workspace, let's look at what types of data there are, and how those data types are interpreted. You can find official documentation on [Tableau Data Types here](https://help.tableau.com/current/pro/desktop/en-us/datafields_typesandroles_datatypes.htm). Below we will relate the data types in Tableau to previously known data types from Python and SQL.
```

## Data Types in Tableau

> 1. **Text**: Similar to string values in python, or varchar type in SQL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Text**: Similar to string values in Python or the varchar type in SQL.
```

1. **Date** values: Date value (01/29/1992)
1. **Date** *and* **Time** values: (01/29/1992 7:07:07 PM)
1. **Numerical values**: Similar to numbers or integers in python
1. **Boolean values**: True or False

> 1. **Geographic values**: Used to create a geographic role. The geographic role is very useful if you are looking to visualize location data from your data source. When you assign a geographic role Tableau is kind enough to auto-generate a latitude and longitude value to the associated field. One thing to keep in mind is that the latitude and longitude values are only applicable to numeric fields or values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Geographic values**: Used to create a geographic role. The geographic role is very useful if you are looking to visualize location data from your data source. When you assign a geographic role, Tableau is kind enough to auto-generate a latitude and longitude value to the associated field. One thing to keep in mind is that the latitude and longitude values are only applicable to numeric fields or values.
```

Reviewer: I think the last sentence is a little unclear. Do you mean that while the latitude and longitude are generated from the location data in the geographic role, those two values will still end up being of a numeric type?

1. **Image role**: field that contains an image
1. **Cluster Group**: field used to create and associate data into a cluster

One of the many great features that Tableau provides is the ability to change a data type within your data source.

{{% notice blue Note "rocket" %}}
Tableau lists the data type as `Text` in the documentation, but when changing the data type of a field it is listed as `string`.
{{% /notice %}}

## Mixed Data Types

> Typically columns within a dataset are the same type of data (string, date, string, image, integer, number, etc..) but when they are mixed (column contains more than just one data type), Tableau will manipulate the data for you automatically. For example if you have a column that has both Numbers and Text, the text will be assigned as `Null`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Typically columns within a dataset are the same type of data (string, date, string, image, integer, number, etc..) but when they are mixed (column contains more than just one data type), Tableau will manipulate the data for you automatically. For example, if you have a column that has both numbers and text, the text will be assigned as `Null`.
```

You can find a more detailed table towards the bottom of [this page](https://help.tableau.com/current/pro/desktop/en-us/datafields_typesandroles_datatypes.htm) from the official Tableau documentation

Usually, the issue of having multiple or mixed data types within a column would be identified during EDA and resolved when cleaning data. However, it is good to know what happens with each field when it is imported if you did not complete these steps!

## Dimensions and Measures

> When you connect to a data source using Tableau, each column within your data set is is assigned a data type and field. However, they may not be categorized as the appropriate role (dimension or measure) when you import your data. Fortunately, changing the role of a table or field is very straight forward. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you connect to a data source using Tableau, each column within your data set is assigned a data type and field. However, they may not be categorized as the appropriate role (dimension or measure) when you import your data. Fortunately, changing the role of a table or field is very straight-forward. 
```

> You are able to right click any field and convert it to a **Measure** or **Dimension**. The easiest ways to associate a field to the appropriate role is as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You are able to right-click any field and convert it to a **Measure** or **Dimension**. The easiest ways to associate a field with the appropriate role are as follows:
```

1. `Measure`: qualitative values (numerical data)
1. `Dimension`: quantitative values (non-numerical)

## Connecting Data

There are many different types of data and file formats that are valid data sources when working with Tableau. Below are some examples:

1. `.csv` files
1. `.json` files
1. `.tsv` files
1. `.xml` files

We will be mostly working with `.csv` files (comma-separated values)

> We will using the [Netflix and TV Shows dataset](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/shivamb/netflix-shows) from Kaggle. Download the dataset from Kaggle or click on the `netflix_titles.csv` link below to download the .csv file to your machine:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will use the [Netflix and TV Shows dataset](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/shivamb/netflix-shows) from Kaggle. Download the dataset from Kaggle or click on the `netflix_titles.csv` link below to download the CSV file to your machine:
```

{{% attachments style="blue" title=".CSV Data" /%}}

> One you have downloaded the `netflix_titles.csv` file, click on the `Data` tab in the top left corner and select `New Data Source` within your Tableau workbook. Click  on the `Upload from computer` button and navigate to the `netflix_tites.csv` file on your machine (probably in your downloads folder), and import the file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One you have downloaded the `netflix_titles.csv` file, click on the `Data` tab in the top left corner and select `New Data Source` within your Tableau workbook. Click on the `Upload from computer` button and navigate to the `netflix_tites.csv` file on your machine (probably in your downloads folder), and import the file.
```

> Once you have imported the spreadsheet, click on the `Sheet 1` tab in the bottom left hand corner to create a new sheet from the data source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have imported the spreadsheet, click on the `Sheet 1` tab in the bottom left-hand corner to create a new sheet from the data source.
```
